>> A new study is the first
to investigate what occurs
in an alternate state of
consciousness by looking inside
the brain of a shaman.
This is "Gaia News."
[THEME MUSIC]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Shamanism is considered to be
the most ancient recorded form
of healing and
spiritual practice.
While science has been
studying the healing
benefits of the psychoactive
plants used by shamans to enter
into an altered state
of consciousness,
there have been very
few studies to look
at the neurological nature
of the state itself.
A groundbreaking new
study investigated
this shamanic state
of consciousness
accessed without the
use of psychedelics.
Carlos Tanner is
a longtime student
of traditional shamanism
and the director
of the Ayahuasca Foundation,
an educational and ceremonial
center in Peru.
>> Shamanism refers to
an alternate dimension,
a dimension where
spirits reside,
where communication is possible,
where greater insights can be
acquired and brought back
to the waking day life.
And so a shaman
would be someone that
can enter into a
different dimension
and then pull that back.
>> The process by which shamans
access this state is rooted
in the rich tradition of what
Carlos Tanner calls a science
of consciousness enhancement.
>> Oftentimes, there is the
term ceremony to describe
the intentional entrance
into this shamanic state.
And so there would
be a preparation
where there might be rituals
to essentially prepare.
Certain clothing might be worn,
and the use of certain tools,
oftentimes like a musical
instrument, might be used.
All of those are this
really beautiful science
of consciousness
enhancement that I
think has been developed
through the continual use
of a psychotropic substance.
Although in many cases,
to the point where
the psychotropic substance
is no longer needed
to enter that state, because the
consciousness enhancement that
was provided by the
psychotropic substance
can be accomplished without it.
>> Dr. Richard Harris is a
researcher at the University
of Michigan who conducted the
recent study on the shamanic
state of consciousness.
Dr. Harris and his team were
interested in investigating
this state in its purest form,
uninfected neurologically
by the use of any
exogenous substances.
To facilitate the entrance
into the altered state
without the use of
psychedelics, the practitioners
all listened to a recording
of shamanic drumming.
>> So we did a study with 24
shamanic practitioners and 24
normal control individuals,
and we collected EEG data--
Electroencephalograph
data, brain activity data--
while each participant
was having their eyes
closed, while they
were listening
to classical music, which
was the control condition,
and then while
they were listening
to the shamanic drumming
music, which was the more
experimental condition.
And so what we're doing
with the shamanic drumming,
we're using the
person's own physiology
to engender the state.
>> In addition, researchers
compared the brain scans
of the shamanic practitioners
in this study to scans
of participants on
psychedelics in other studies.
>> We found key differences
between entering the shamanic
state of consciousness and
altered states engendered
by things like psilocybin,
and ketamine, and MDMA.
It's important to
know that, even
though,
phenomenologically, there's
some similarities
in the experience,
like out-of-body
spiritual, blissful state,
like some of those
experiences are the same.
But the underlying
neurobiology is different.
>> Specifically, the researchers
found increases in gamma
brainwave activity in
shamanic practitioners not
on psychedelics without the
typical decrease in alpha
brainwave activity seen
in those on psychedelics.
Just what are the implications
of these findings?
>> That's kind of
what it's showing,
is that that shamanic
state of consciousness,
you can get there
without taking a drug.
I think that's important
for the average person.
And that might give them more
insight into how they tick.
>> For Carlos Tanner, there is
an even greater implication.
>> One of the benefits
from this study is clear,
that it helps us to
acknowledge, from our paradigm,
from our materialist
perspective,
that shamanic states are real.
They are verifiable,
scientifically proven to exist.
And where we're at, that's
a huge step forward.
And I'm so happy to
see studies like this.
And the understanding
or the recognition
that shamanic states and
altered states of consciousness
have the potential to provide
this benefit to us in our lives
is definitely the direction
I want to see us going.
>> For a new perspective,
this is "Gaia News."
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.